---
layout: post
author: Friedrich Lindenberg
title: "Why civic hackers should hang out in a newsroom"
opennews: true
---

The news is breaking apart, and its incredibly interesting to watch. I don't mean the balance sheets of many media companies. What fascinates me is how the transfer of news products to the web has helped to make many of their functions more explicit, inviting us to re-design them. Craigslist's putting classifieds on the web is an easy example, so is last.fm's developing a new way of finding music you like. But what about the core functions of journalism, like its role in government oversight?

A few years ago, I joined a community of civic coders from all over the globe who are working on data-driven tools to help citizens understand how their government works and what it is doing. As I first started to work on these types of projects, I somehow managed to not think of them as a function of journalism. But like Craigslist, civic hacking is about taking functional aspects of what used to be part of the news package, and adapting it to the web.

## They've been doing it for years

The open data community has developed an amazing range of tools and platforms over the past couple of years. Civic hackers have tackled problems as diverse as finding a nicer place to live, to investigating global corporate structures. At the same time, we've learned a few lessons about the limitiations of our approach. We've had to learn how hard it is to make conclusions from spotty data. We realized how difficult it is to generate meaningful context out of data alone and, most of all, how hard it is to build and maintain a large audience once the initial dataviz high has worn off.

Like our goals, these challenges are something that we share with many news organisations, and we could do well to learn from their experience. That's why I've been excited to join the Knight-Mozilla OpenNews fellowship and to cooperate with my news organisation, Spiegel Online, over the past few months.

Working as a civic hacker in a newsroom is about developing a mutual understanding of what each side is trying to do. The key differences, to me, are in how we think of our audience and the products that we publish. 

## Masses and Niches

One major difference is in the way in which we attempt to develop an audience. With some data projects, you are only ever going to address a fringe group of enthusiasts - people with a keen interest to explore large amounts of information, whether they are journalists, activists, researchers or just citizens. Other projects may be aimed at a larger audience, such as people looking for an appropriate school for their kids or the right type of medicine for their medical conditions.

Still, this is completely unlike working in a newsroom: here, everything needs to be written for anyone - from a school child to an academic whether they have never heard of the topic before or whether they've followed it for years. This is incredibly hard, and I'm not sure that the products of such an approach are really appropriate for any particular group most of the time.

Finding a compromise between these approaches will probably mean developing projects on multiple levels, allowing the users to find a level of detail and complexity that best meets their interests and prior knowledge about the subject.

## Articles and Platforms

Similarly, its interesting to see how much our approaches are determined by the outputs of our work. As a software developer, I think of software projects as ongoing efforts - platforms that are incrementally extended and continually create value. This is how we justify the upfront investment of developing software, but it is not a great way of keeping people interested. Journalists, on the other hand, tend to follow the other extreme: each article is seen as a product of its own, and relations to other articles on the same topic are seen as lucky accidents rather than signs of a larger pattern. 

One way to join these two worlds is to focus on developing tools that support journalistic activities as they are - whether it is about making it easy to add charts to a story or notifying journalists about relevant data releases. A much harder task, however, is joining content and technology to create news applications in which custom software directly and explicitly helps to tell a story. Few news organisations have mastered that kind of project, but next years OpenNews fellows are lucky to join teams like ProPublica and the Texas Tribune which are on the very forefront of this development. 

## Join Us

Five months into my fellowship, I'm certain that the best place to learn how to engineer great civic applications is right here, in a newsroom. Being in this environment has taught me about pushing things out to a wider audience, about telling a story.

At the same time, being a fellow gives me the independence to experiment with new technologies and to go outside of the organisation and meet people from all across the globe to learn about their ideas and approaches to help people inform themselves. This is a great time to be involved in this discussion, and the fellowship will put you right at the center of it. 

Join us in 2014. 
